The `cross_sectional` dataset provides descriptive statistics
for each client_id in a 1% sample of main ping data.
This dataset simplifies the longitudinal table by replacing 
the longitudinal arrays with summary statistics. 
This is the most useful dataset for describing our user base.

#### Content
Each row in the `cross_sectional` dataset represents one `client_id`,
which is approximately a user.
Each column is a summary statistic describing the client_id.

For example, the longitudinal table has a row called `geo_country` 
which contains an array of country codes.
For the same `client_id` the `cross_sectional` table 
has columns called `geo_country_mode` and `geo_country_configs` 
containing single summary statistics for 
the modal country and the number of distinct countries in the array.

| `client_id` | `geo_country`          | `geo_country_mode` | `geo_country_configs`|
| ----------- |:----------------------:|:------------------:|:--------------------:|
| 1           | array<"US">            | "US"               | 1                    |
| 2           | array<"DE", "DE" "US"> | "DE"               | 2                    |

#### Background and Caveats

This table is much easier to work with than the longitudinal dataset because
you don't need to work with arrays.
This table has a limited number of pre-computed summary statistics
so you're metric may not be included.

Note that this dataset is a summary of the longitudinal dataset,
so it is also a 1% sample of all client_ids.

All summary statistics are computed over the last 180 days,
so this dataset can be insensitive to changes over time.

#### Accessing the Data

The cross_sectional dataset is available in re:dash.
Here's an [example query](https://sql.telemetry.mozilla.org/queries/4202/source).

The data is stored as a parquet table in S3 at the following address.
See [this cookbook](/cookbooks/parquet.md) to get started working with the data in Spark.
```
s3://telemetry-parquet/cross_sectional/v1/
```

#### Further Reading

The `cross_sectional` dataset is generated by 
[this code](https://github.com/mozilla/telemetry-batch-view/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/mozilla/telemetry/views/CrossSectionalView.scala).
Take a look at [this query](https://sql.telemetry.mozilla.org/queries/4203/source) for a schema.
